[THEME MUSIC]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And today, I'm speaking
with Dr. Bradley Nelson.
He is an expert in bioenergetic
medicine and energy psychology
and author of the book
"The Emotion Code."
We're going to be going deep
into how emotions impact
your physiology, your
life, and how you can start
to tap into releasing some
of those emotions that
could be holding you back.
Dr. Bradley, a pleasure
to be speaking with you.
>> Great to be here.
>> So everybody has a story
when it comes to a catalyst
or a beginning or an impetus
that sort of set you off
on this journey.
What was it for you, and can
you tell me about that time?
>> Well, sure.
For me, it really
started at age seven.
I was really sick
with the measles.
And I had overheard my
parents talking about
how, the next day, the plan was
I was going into the hospital
and going into something called
an oxygen tent, which I didn't
really understand, but the tent
part of it sounded interesting.
[LAUGHS]
But I was too sick to enjoy it.
So everyone else
had gone to bed,
and my parents
came into the room.
They'd made a bed for
me upstairs on a couch
so I could be near
their bedroom.
And my mother said to my
father, she said, honey,
will you kneel down
with me and say a prayer
so that our boy will
be able to get well?
So they did.
And my father's offering this
prayer, this heartfelt prayer,
for me.
And knowing my dad,
it was probably
the first time in my
life that I'd actually
heard him pray out loud.
And in the middle of this,
this remarkable thing happened.
This change started
at the top of my head,
and it went, whoosh,
through my body.
And I was healed instantly.
Now, to go from
being really sick one
moment, in the next moment
to being completely well
and totally, vibrantly healthy
is so bizarre and so remarkable
and so unbelievable
and so amazing
that you don't ever forget it.
And every moment of that is
still just burned into my mind
like it happened yesterday.
And I held my tongue until
my dad was done praying,
which didn't take long.
And when he was done,
I said, I'm better.
God healed me.
I'm better.
And they said,
that's fine, honey.
Go back to sleep now.
Tomorrow, you're
going to the hospital.
But that taught me a very
powerful, very profound,
lesson, and that is that
there is a higher power.
There's another power out
there that we can draw upon.
And then that really
stayed with me.
So fast forward about
another seven years, and I
ended up having these terrific
pains all of a sudden,
out of the blue,
that were in my back.
And these pains
were so severe they
would take my breath away
or sometimes just put me
on the ground.
And my parents
were very worried.
I was panicked.
We went to the hospital.
They ran all these tests, and
they said I had kidney disease.
And it was a serious
situation for me.
My kidneys were either
going to get better
or they weren't, and it
was about a 50/50 thing.
And if they didn't
get better, there
were no kidney
transplants back then,
so I was a goner at that point.
But there was nothing that
they had to offer me medically.
And so my parents
decided they would
take me to see some
alternative healers.
And so they took me
to see some people who
worked out on the edge of
town in a trailer house.
They were actually out in
the middle of a wheat field.
It was really interesting--
an enormous contrast
from where I had been.
And they started working on me.
And in short order, I was
feeling dramatically better.
And within about a
month, I had forgotten
that I'd ever been sick.
And my parents took me
back to the hospital.
They ran all the tests.
And as I recall, they
ran the tests twice.
And they said, well, it's
a spontaneous remission.
Whatever we did
must have helped.
But I knew they hadn't
really done anything.
These other doctors
had helped me.
So I decided that's
what I wanted
to do with my life was
go into the healing arts.
And so I did.
I got distracted for a number
of years, going into business
and going into computer
programming and so on.
But eventually, it
was another answer
to prayer, a very profound
answer, that brought me back
to that direction.
So when I got out of
chiropractic school
and I went into practice,
I decided that God
had gotten me into this.
And God goes by different
names for different people--
source energy,
creator, whatever.
But I thought,
that higher power--
God-- has gotten me into this.
Maybe now I can get
some help because I
need help with these people
that are coming to me
that have all these problems.
So I developed this habit.
And the habit was that
when someone would come in
to see me, before I
would go to work on them,
I would just take a moment and
direct my thoughts to heaven
and ask God to help
me with this person.
And it was a totally private,
totally personal, habit.
No one ever knew that
I was doing this.
It was just a momentary
pause, really.
But I'll tell you, I practiced
for 17 years in a brick
and mortar practice and for
about two and a half years
in a distance practice.
During those years,
there were times
when people would come in to see
me that had conditions going on
and problems that were
happening for them that I
didn't know how to address.
And there were times when I
would offer that silent prayer
and ask for help when the
information would just
flood into my body like an
avalanche of understanding
and data.
And sometimes that included
ways of looking at things that I
had never even considered that
I don't think anybody else
had considered before, either.
And so I know that that
higher power, whatever
you want to call
it, is very real
and is aware of what we're
doing, I believe, all the time.
So that led to
little discoveries.
And gradually, over
time, learning everything
that I could from every
source that I could
and from ancient texts and
whatever other people were
doing that seemed to work,
I was able to put together
this method of working with the
emotional baggage that we call,
now, the Emotion Code.
And so, I left practice
eventually and wrote this book.
And now it's coming out again.
It's out again now
as a hardcover.
And it's changing people's
lives all over the world--
real exciting.
>> So paint the picture a
little bit more for me when this
kidney disease started
to happen for you.
How old were you?
What was your life like?
I'm assuming
everything was rosy,
and then, all of a sudden,
it was just out of nowhere.
And this journey out into
this wheat field again.
>> Well, I grew up in a
very idyllic home, I think.
My mother and father were
childhood sweethearts,
and I don't remember
them arguing ever.
So it was probably
very unusual, really.
And so, there was a lot
of love in our home.
And it was really a
wonderful experience
that I had growing up, unlike
so many people, unfortunately.
But I was 13 years
old when I started
getting these pains in my back.
And at first, I was
able to ignore them.
But then, suddenly, they
reached this just unbelievable
crescendo.
And when I would get
hit with this pain,
it would be like I'd been
run through with a sword
or a telephone
pole or something.
I mean, it was just
unbearable pain.
And it would come
totally out of the blue.
And it was, frankly, terrifying.
And my parents were
very concerned about me.
And, of course, we
went to the hospital,
and they ran the tests, and
I was diagnosed with kidney
disease, 50% fatal, they said.
Nothing could really
be done about it.
I was either going
to recover or not.
And so my mother was
very into, and very open
to, alternative
types of healing.
And so my parents
decided they would
take me to see these
alternative doctors who
started to work with me.
And what they did was just
what I needed because it didn't
take long, and I was better.
>> Was it a reiki,
or was it an energy?
Do you remember exactly
what the protocol was?
Or was there just, you
went in and it happened?
Was it a group prayer?
Was it a meditation?
>> They were osteopathic
doctors who--
back in, I believe it was in
the late '50s or early 1960s,
the osteopathic profession
was kind of engulfed
by the medical profession.
And so, nowadays, most
osteopathic doctors
are, basically, like medical
doctors here in the US.
But they decided they didn't
want any part of that,
and so they stayed out of that.
And so they had
their own practice,
and they were kind of on
the outside of things.
But I can remember many
times going to their house
and seeing a busload
of people drive away
that had driven there
from some other state.
People would organize
these bus trips to see them
because they were true healers.
And so they were doing
osteopathic work with me.
I thought for years
they were chiropractors.
They were realigning
things in my spine,
realigning bones and things,
and giving me certain potions
and things to drink.
[LAUGHS]
But they were true healers.
>> And you went to the
hospital, ran the tests again.
And this word you used--
spontaneous remission--
did that come up for you in
this particular instance?
>> Well, as I recall,
how things went,
about a month after
I had been diagnosed,
I was feeling completely fine.
And my parents took
me back to the clinic,
and the tests were run again.
And as I recall, they
ran the tests twice.
And then, I heard
those words-- well,
it's a spontaneous remission.
Whatever we did
must have helped.
And I was only 13 years
old, but I wasn't stupid.
I knew that what
these people had done
had been what my body needed.
Sometimes you just know
something in your heart.
I knew that what they
had done had helped me
and was what my body wanted.
So I decided at that
point that that's what
I wanted to do with my life.
I wanted to go into the healing
arts and do what they did.
>> So studying chiropractic
care makes sense
because it's
affiliated, in a way,
with osteopathic medicine
in that it works with,
sort of, the energetic and the
spinal systems of the body.
How did you move from
chiropractic care
deeper into this emotional?
Was there something?
Because chiropractors are, say,
five different types of people.
There's the real
manual adjusters
and, on the other
spectrum, there's
the real energy healers.
What took you from more of
a manual adjustment person
into this, like, there's
something deeper going
on in the body?
>> Well, these two osteopathic
doctors that I saw--
Dr. Ida Harmon and
Dr. Alan Bain--
I can remember lying on
my back on their table,
looking up at them,
saying, when I grow up,
I want to do what you do.
And they would say
to me, no, you don't.
They'd say, no, no.
Because if you go
to school, you'll
get your head so full of fixed
ideas that when you come out,
you won't be able to
think for yourself.
You won't be an
independent thinker.
You'll be like a zombie.
And that really stuck with me.
So when I went to school,
I was very much on guard
and very on the defensive.
And when my instructors
would say things like,
this is the best way to
do this certain thing,
my thought would always be,
well, maybe that's true,
but maybe that isn't.
Maybe there's a better way.
Maybe there's a faster way.
Maybe there's an easier way.
So I was always just wide open--
radically open-- to
whatever I could learn.
So when I got into practice,
that stayed with me.
And I was obsessed with
getting my patients well
because I felt that's why
they were coming to me.
And so anything that I could
find that might help them I
was open to doing.
And I was open to using new
methods or different methods
or things that might
be frowned upon
or things that
might be brand new
or things that maybe no
one else had thought of.
And so, really, I think
that during those years,
the most important piece
of that puzzle, to me,
was this connection that I
was making with each person.
So really, all day long, I was
kind of in a state of prayer.
Because I'm asking for help with
this person and then asking for
help with the next person.
And so I think that that was a
really powerful aspect of this.
And I believe now that I've
been given this mission
to take this to the world.
In fact, let me share something.
I had gotten involved in
computers and computer
programming and was
really into that.
And I was about six months away
from going into the MBA program
at Brigham Young
University in Utah.
And we went home.
My wife and I went
home to Montana,
where my parents were
living, where I'd grown up.
And we were sitting around
with my parents, talking.
And it was Christmas time.
And my father, totally
out of the blue,
said, are you sure
that you don't want
to go to chiropractic school?
It seems like a great
career, and you've always
wanted to do it.
And I said, no, no, no.
I'm going this other direction.
And he said, well, why don't you
think about it one more time.
So I thought, OK.
So I did.
And my wife and I made
up a pro and con list,
and we still didn't
know what to do.
And now, all of a
sudden, I thought
I had my life figured out.
And now, all of a sudden, I'm
kind of back to this old dream
of going into the healing arts.
And now, I'm right in
the middle of the fence.
So that night, I got on
my knees and I prayed.
And I asked God
to help me to know
if he had anything to say about
this, I was open to whatever.
And so, that night, I had this
dream, right, three times.
Well, it wasn't really a dream.
I was awake in three
different times
to find my mind full of these
warm, happy thoughts about how
great it is to be
able to heal people
naturally and help people
naturally and serve mankind
and so on.
And I would think,
well, yeah, that's true,
but computers and--
[SNORES]
--and I'd fall back asleep.
That happened three
times that night.
So the next night,
I'm on my knees
again, being kind of slow.
And I'm asking again--
Father, help me to
know what to do.
I'm open.
And I had the same
experience that night.
But this time, each time, it
was exponentially more powerful
than the time before.
So on the third time on
the second night when
I was awakened, I can't
describe how powerful
this was, but, I mean,
the thoughts of service
to mankind and the planet--
all of humanity-- it was
just absolutely overwhelming.
And right then, I
actually heard a voice
that spoke to me as clearly as
I'm speaking to you right now.
And it said, this
is a sacred calling.
Those were the words.
And I thought, OK, I get it.
That's it.
And so I followed that.
And I didn't really
understand what that meant.
But years later, I had
this experience where--
I think we've all probably
heard at some point in our lives
that the body is like a
temple, somehow, right?
We've heard that.
I think that's probably in
every religion on the planet.
And I had heard that before.
But one day, I had
this little routine
that I mentioned, where I
have a patient that comes in.
My patient is lying
face down on this table.
Before I go to work on this
patient, I take a moment,
and I just connect with the
higher power and ask for help.
So this one particular day,
I have a patient in there,
and I ask for help.
And all of a sudden, I have this
incredibly powerful experience,
where it was as if
my eyes suddenly
were open for the first
time in my whole life,
and I saw and understood
with spiritual eyes
that I was standing
in the presence
of this sacred temple--
the temple of the body.
And it was absolutely just
an incredible experience.
And I was just instantly
filled with the deepest sense
of reverence and awe-- to
be standing in the presence
of this sacred
edifice, the body--
the body temple.
Now, this only lasted for,
probably, four or five seconds,
and then that window
sort of closed.
But it's stayed with
me all this time.
And so it gave me a
different understanding
of what that sacred
calling, what that meant.
Because when we're
working with the body--
in any way, any
kind of capacity--
when we're helping
people to feel better--
if we're a medical doctor
and we're sewing people up
or if we're a
chiropractor, we're
realigning things, or if you're
releasing emotional baggage,
whatever it is--
what you're doing
is a sacred thing
because the body
itself is sacred.
And this is an understanding
that the ancients
had that we've lost--
for the most part.
>> That's true.
And I think that ancient
language and ancient religions
talk about this idea of God
resides within you, as you.
And when you say
that to me, we've
externalized God
in so many ways.
And when you put it like this,
it really brings it back to we
are all cut from the same cloth.
We are all part of
this divine matrix.
Your work has ended up sort
of zeroing in on emotions--
I mean, writing "Emotion Code"
and having that speciality.
What was it that made
you really go deep
into that particular ideology?
Because you could have gone
into how toxins affect the body
or how electromagnetic
fields affect the body,
but you focused
on-- well, in a way,
electromagnetic fields--
but how emotions
are related to the body.
What happened there,
and what are emotions,
and how do they get
stored in the body?
>> Well, how it came
about, really, for me,
was I was trying to balance
the organs and the glands
in my patients' bodies.
And I found that sometimes
I could balance their organs
and glands because the organs
and the glands, for the most
part, are connected to
certain muscles in the body.
People were coming to see
me with pain, typically,
in various parts of the body.
And I found that
muscle imbalance was
a big reason for that, but
that was secondary to the organ
or gland imbalance.
And I found that, sometimes,
I could balance these organs
and glands, and
sometimes I couldn't.
But then, there was
a serendipitous thing
that happened to
me that helped me
to realize that
emotional baggage was
a piece of the puzzle.
And I knew about
emotional baggage,
but I never realized that
emotional baggage could
be a big underlying
cause of imbalance
in the organs and the glands.
And so it's a process that
I think many people are
undergoing all over the world.
It's almost like the old
story of the blind men who
were sent to discover
what an elephant was.
And depending on where
the blind man was,
he would tell a different
story when he came back--
oh, it's like a big snake
if he's at the nose,
oh, it's like a big paintbrush
if he's at the tail.
We're all kind of
gradually uncovering
this edifice of this incredible
body that we live in.
And we're starting to understand
how the body works and so on.
Well, the body itself is energy.
And so if you magnify
your hand a million times
or more, eventually, you're
face to face with an atom.
And you realize if
you look in the atom,
there's really nothing in
there-- just empty space,
right, and some infinitesimally
tiny energies that are zipping
around at the speed of light.
And that's what we are.
Well, when you're
experiencing emotions,
you see, what we believe
is that every emotion has
its own specific frequency.
And if you're feeling
an emotion of anger,
for example, that's a
different frequency,
or a different vibration,
than an emotion of sadness,
and that's different
from frustration.
They're all different.
But if you're feeling an
emotion that's powerful enough,
your whole being can
take on this vibration.
And in those circumstances,
what can happen
is the energy of that emotion
can become just too much
for the body to take.
And so some of that
energy remains behind.
There's a process that
we go through when
we experience emotions.
The emotion is generated.
And by the way, the
emotions in the body
are generated by the organs
and some of the glands.
And so, in other
words, what's generated
is the emotional frequency that
we perceive as the emotion.
And so, energetically,
that's how we look at it.
Well, that happens.
The emotion is generated,
we feel the emotion,
we acknowledge it,
and then we allow
it to dissipate and move on.
And that's the process that
we are supposed to go through.
If that process is
interrupted somewhere,
if we either bury that
emotion and we don't allow
it to surface or if that emotion
is just so big that we can't
really deal with it, then
the energy of that emotion
remains in the body.
And so, then what happens is it
may manifest many, many years
down the road as all kinds
of different problems.
The operative word that
we use is "discomfort."
If you have some
kind of discomfort,
that's probably
emotionally based.
Now, discomfort can be physical
or mental or emotional.
Let me share a story with you.
There was a man that came
in to see me many years ago.
And his back pain
was really severe.
It was a nine on a
zero to 10 scale.
And 10 is call the
emergency, right?
And it had been
going on for a while.
And I tested him and found
he had a trapped emotion.
The emotion was anger.
And using the
Emotion Code, I was
able to figure out that had
occurred about 20 years before.
And he remembered
exactly what had
gone on-- some really difficult,
traumatic things at work.
And so I released the emotion,
which just takes a few seconds.
And instantly, the pain
went from a nine to a zero.
Now, he kept bending over
and exclaiming he couldn't
believe it was like a miracle.
Well, I was grateful
that it worked so well.
But the interesting thing
is, a couple days later, he
came back into me.
And he said, you know,
my back is still fine.
He said, I still
can't believe it.
But he said, I had
another problem
when I came in here that
I didn't tell you about.
He said, for as long
as I can remember,
I've basically
been a rageaholic.
And he said, I'm always
yelling at my wife and my kids.
I've gotta watch the
road rage, and I've
been to anger management
several times.
It hasn't really helped me.
But he said, since you released
that emotion of anger from me,
I feel different.
I feel like a new person.
I don't feel angry anymore.
I'm not on edge anymore.
How did that work?
And at the time, I said,
well, I don't know.
[LAUGHS]
But what we believe,
you see, is when
you have a trapped
emotion, you've
got this ball of
emotional energy
from about the
size of a baseball
to about the size of a softball.
And these will lodge in
different places in the body.
And sometimes where
they lodge has
a metaphysical significance,
and sometimes they
will lodge in areas where
there's some previous injury
or something.
And what they will do is they
will distort the normal energy
field of the body.
So when you distort the normal
energy field of the body,
you're distorting
the body itself.
Because that's all the body
is is an energy field, right?
And so, eventually,
you distort that field
long enough, you're interfering
with the chemical reactions
in that tissue, you're
interfering with the blood
flow, maybe the lymph
flow, to some degree,
certainly the flow
of acupuncture energy
in that area.
And so when we release
that emotional energy,
suddenly, things change,
and discomfort can go away.
Well, in this guy's
case-- think about this--
he had this ball of
anger in his back.
After 20 years, it was
causing him excruciating pain.
But there was something
else going on.
That emotion, that anger, it's
a frequency, it's a vibration.
So his body was feeling
that emotion 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
So when a situation would
come along in his life
where he might tend to
feel the emotion of anger,
he would slide right
into that resonance
much more easily,
much more readily,
than he otherwise would.
Why?
Because, literally,
part of his body
was feeling that
emotion constantly.
And so getting rid of it
made an immediate change
not only physically but also
mentally and emotionally.
So if you think about it, we
all have emotional baggage.
And getting rid of that baggage
is a tremendously powerful key
to becoming who
you're supposed to be,
to getting back to the you
that you are intended to be.
And that's really
exciting to me.
>> Amazing-- beautiful.
And it seems that we're
ripe for this information
now because we're
becoming more aware--
in the circles,
probably, that we
operate in,
especially-- that there
is an attention that
needs to be paid
to the emotional sensitivity
of the human frame.
And yet, culturally, we
still have this conditioning
that teaches us to
suppress emotions,
to hold things back, especially
in the masculine side
of humanity.
Tell me about how
we've been taught
to suppress emotions,
and also, maybe,
talk to me a little
bit about what
are the main types of
energetic blockages
that you see presented in
your work and your practice
and everything you've done?
Like, what would be common
feelings or emotions
or symptoms that people
might be experiencing
that, listening to
this, they might think,
I need to work on that?
>> Right.
Well, yes, it's true.
As men, especially
in the West, we're
taught to suppress our emotions.
Boys don't cry.
Men, especially, don't cry.
We're taught that emotions,
and showing emotion,
is a sign of weakness.
And so we tend to
suppress those emotions.
And as a result,
women are much more
likely to seek help for
emotional difficulties,
while men are much less likely.
And so, as a result,
men tend to have
more problems, more diseases
and so on in certain categories.
What I have seen, personally,
with emotional baggage
is that they seem to be the
biggest single underlying cause
of depression and anxiety
and phobias and panic attacks
and PTSD and eating disorders
and self-sabotage of all kinds.
And they also are the
biggest underlying cause
of the physical pain
that people experience--
neck pain, migraine, headaches,
low back pain, knee pain--
but other problems, too.
People seek medical help for
many other kinds of conditions.
And in my experience
over the last 30 years,
every single one of
those conditions--
things like infertility and
asthma, digestive disorders,
and even cancer--
all of those diseases,
in my experience,
always have an underlying
emotional component.
And my hope and my dream is
that as more time goes on,
eventually, Western medicine
will recognize this.
I think it's going
to be inevitable.
We just recently
finished a study where
we found that we
got a, I believe,
a 36% decrease in PTSD symptoms
and about a 35% decrease
in depression symptoms within
about a three-week span
of using the Emotion Code
and, specifically, releasing
the emotions that
cluster around the heart
that we refer to
as a heart wall.
>> Through HeartMath, we're
learning that the heart can
emit an energy that we can sort
of communicate in this unspoken
language of energetics.
And I feel that, in the
work that I'm involved with
and the hundreds of people I've
interviewed over the last 10
years, that this
self-doubt, lack
of self-love, lack of
self-worth, is a big problem.
And as people get
older, they start
to sort of enter a process of
clearing out energies, clearing
out all energetic baggage,
as you talk about,
or emotional baggage.
And a lot of people
find that it's
related to their childhood.
Maybe they had a
traumatic childhood,
or they were neglected,
or they were abused.
And then, later on in life, they
have these emotions come out.
Maybe they're
approaching midlife
and are like, what's
going on with me?
And they go, well, maybe
it's related to back then.
Do you find that certain
childhood traumas or childhood
experiences can cause
emotional baggage
to be stored in
the body and result
in this negative self-talk
and negative self-love?
>> Well, yes, absolutely.
The experiences that we
go through as a child
can definitely have
tremendous impact.
Because, of course, we
look at, for example,
our parents as gods, right?
And when we're
abused by our parents
or we're talked down
to by our parents
or we're told we're
never going to amount
to anything by our
parents, it's very likely
that that's going
to get incorporated
in a very powerful way.
It's so important for us to
be careful with the words
that we say,
especially to children.
Because they're just open
books and just sponges.
And so it's so important to
be very aware of what we say.
Sometimes we might
say something in jest
to a child that can just go
right to the core of that child
and can really affect them.
So the words that we
say are so important.
And the emotional
baggage that we pick up
as kids definitely has
huge effects on us,
oftentimes years down the
road, and not only as far as
how we feel about ourselves
and how we interact with others
and how we perceive
the world but also,
again, in physical
symptoms and also
in emotional-mental symptoms.
There was a young woman
that came to an event
once that I was teaching.
And she came up out
of the audience--
I asked for a volunteer--
and she came up out
of the audience.
And I started doing
some testing with her
and asking if she had a trapped
emotion that we could release.
And the answer
that I got was yes.
And she was holding out
her outstretched arm,
and I'm asking questions and
then pressing on her arm.
And if it's strong, the
answer's yes, and if it's weak,
the answer is no.
And we found that she had a
trapped emotion of forlorn,
which is kind of
feeling all alone,
hopeless, desolate, lonely.
It occurred when she was in
the first year of her life.
So I said, do you know
anything about this?
And of course, she didn't
have any remembrance of it.
But I had happened to meet
this young girl and her mother
at the beginning of this event.
And I looked out
at the audience,
and there's her mother, and
she's as white as a sheet.
She's got her
hands up like this.
And I said, hey, do you have
any idea what this is about?
And she was very
embarrassed, but she
said she thought maybe she did.
She said that, back
in those years,
she used to use cloth diapers.
And one day, she accidentally
pinned her daughter
to her diaper.
And she didn't know about
it until she changed her
the next time.
And she was horrified to find
out that she'd done this.
And she had never told her
daughter until that moment.
She put it behind her.
Well, the interesting
thing was, here's
this poor little baby feeling
this emotion of forlorn--
no one's helping me, I'm
crying and crying and crying,
and I'm in terrible pain,
someone come help me.
And nobody did.
And so she develops this trapped
emotion of forlorn, right?
So we released the emotion,
and she went back and sat down.
And I didn't think
anything else about.
In fact, I kind of
forgot about it.
And about 10 days
later, I get an email
from this young girl's mother.
And she said,
listen, my daughter's
had this problem with
her hip and her knee.
It's been getting gradually
worse for a number of years,
and we've taken her
to different people.
Nobody's been able to
really figure this out.
But, she said, the moment
you released that emotion
of forlorn, that has been gone.
And I waited 10 days
to see if it was real
or if it was going to come back.
It hasn't come back.
And she said, not only
that, she said my daughter--
it was affecting the way
that she was walking,
and she's walking better now.
But she said she also feels
this new lightness of being
that she's never felt before.
And she's telling
everyone about this.
So you see, the
Emotion Code can tap
into these unconscious
memories that we have,
and it can find those and
find emotional baggage
that you don't know
anything about consciously.
In fact, sometimes, we
pick up emotional baggage
in the womb from what's going on
with mom or dad or the family.
Sometimes we pick
up emotional baggage
at the moment of
conception, we find,
that's passed from a parent
that they might have gotten
from a parent that they might
have gotten from a parent
that, sometimes, these'll go
back for many generations.
And you can find those
and get rid of those, too.
>> You're walking us into
the subconscious here.
There's people that have helped
to pioneer this understanding,
including yourself,
that we are heavily
conditioned during this
early stage of life.
What is your understanding of
the role that the subconscious
plays in this emotional
story, and how would you
explain that to the layperson?
>> Well, if you think about it,
we have this conscious mind,
which is where we spend all
of our waking hours, right?
The subconscious mind
is the other part of us,
this vastly
intelligent part of us,
that is so smart that it
can take the sandwich you
had for lunch and can
convert some of that
over into new cardiac muscle
tissue or new nerve cells.
I mean, it's a level of
intelligence beyond our ability
to really comprehend at
this point where we are.
So the conscious mind
is a tiny, tiny part
of your total intelligence.
Now, they say that a
single cell in the body
is equivalent in complexity
to a full-size aircraft
carrier with thousands
of people working onboard
at their different jobs,
with jets on the ramp,
with their engines spooled
up, ready to take off.
That's a single cell.
And the last estimate was
that the average adult has
about 137 trillion of those.
Let me tell you something--
your subconscious mind is
aware of every single one of
those, down to the DNA level,
down to the quantum level.
And so every face you've ever
seen in a crowd, everything
you've ever eaten or tasted
or touched or smelled,
the whole history of
your health or disease,
it's all in there in
that subconscious mind.
So consciously, we are
barely functional, I think.
We like to think of
ourselves as really smart,
but the subconscious
mind puts us all
to shame because it
is so intelligent.
So what we have learned to do--
and the Emotion Code
and the Body Code,
all the work that we do--
is based on this
understanding that we
can ask questions
of the subconscious,
and we can get answers.
Now, the problem is, you
see, the conscious mind
and the subconscious mind need
to agree on certain things.
For example, let's say
that you would like
to become wealthy, all right?
Well, that's fine.
Consciously, you want
to become wealthy.
And so you want to
move in that direction.
But if your
subconscious mind has
learned from the things
that have come in
as inputs that it's not
OK for you to be wealthy,
what will happen is
the subconscious mind
will prevent that, or you may
become wealthy and then lose
that wealth and have to
regain it over and over.
And this applies to everything.
Let's say, for example,
that subconsciously--
we actually had
this case once where
there was a woman who was
trying to lose weight.
She was very overweight.
And what had happened
was, we finally
were able to understand,
was that she had seen
what happened with her mother.
Her mother, when
she was a child,
was overweight, went on
a diet, lost the weight,
promptly had an affair
and destroyed the family,
ended up in divorce--
terribly painful.
So here's this child now who's
in her 40s and 50s trying
to lose weight and can't
because the subconscious mind
has this idea that if we lose
weight, we'll have an affair
and our marriage will end,
and that'll be the end of it.
And so she was never able to
get to that point, you see.
And so that emotional
baggage will run us.
And I'll tell you something,
the future, I believe,
of human development
and human progress
is to understand that if you
can line up the conscious mind
and what your goals
and desires are
with the subconscious mind,
when you can line those two up--
by getting rid, generally,
of the emotional baggage
in the subconscious--
when you can line up
the subconscious
with the conscious,
then things can really
happen for you, you see.
And so far, we've
really, mainly,
been working with
the conscious mind.
You think about all the
people who-- all of us,
we've all done this,
we all buy tapes--
tapes, I'm dating myself--
but we all listen to
things and watch videos,
and we try to progress
and make our life work
as well as we can with
the conscious mind.
But if your conscious mind
is opposed to that, then
no matter what you do,
it's not going to work out.
And I'll tell you something
else-- if your subconscious
mind is OK with you being
sick or is OK with you having
some kind of a disease or is
OK with you being depressed
and so on, it's going to
be hard for you to get well
until you start getting
rid of that baggage.
>> Wow.
This is huge.
And we think of the subconscious
mind as the limbic brain,
right, just back here.
And this is the conscious brain.
But how you described it to
me is that the subconscious
is everywhere.
>> Yeah.
>> Can you explain that?
Because we're taught this
sort of theory, right--
conscious brain,
subconscious brain, or it's
the little almond, or
it's the little this,
or the limbic brain.
But you're giving a
much more expansive idea
of the subconscious.
>> Yeah.
Well, I believe that our
entire body is intelligent, OK?
We have this analog
sort of computer
with our physical brain.
And we do our best to get
through life using this brain.
But the great
secret, I believe, is
that the seat of the
subconscious mind
is really the heart.
Back in the 1960s,
doctors first started
doing heart transplants.
And it didn't take long before
people would come back and say
things like, gee, my taste
in music or food or sports
has totally changed.
Or they'd have memory,
sometimes, of places
that they'd never in
their lives visited.
Sometimes their handwriting
would have totally changed.
And in every case, when
they were connected
with the family of
the heart donor,
they would find out,
oh, my gosh, yes, that's
our son's handwriting
that you have now.
How bizarre is that?
Or, yes, our daughter
was a concert violinist.
That must be why those
passages of yours you
keep playing over and over.
Those were her
favorite passages.
How strange is that?
And the memories of the
places that you've been,
yes, our son had been to those
places on his motorcycle trips,
and now you have those memories.
How bizarre is that?
Well, you see, the
ancients believed
that the heart was the seat of
the soul, the source of love
and creativity and romance and,
really, the core of our being.
And in the West, we've never
really given any of those ideas
any credence because,
of course, they
didn't have the kind of
equipment that we have now.
We know the heart
is just to pump.
That's all it is.
But, of course, now,
thanks to HeartMath
and some other people that
are doing this kind of work,
we're finding out that the
heart really is a second brain.
And, of course, it puts
out this energy field.
And when you're feeling love or
affection for another person,
your heart rates
will synchronize,
and your heartbeat will become
measurable in their brainwaves
and so on.
So there is this
incredible aspect to us
that we've been unaware of.
Now, what we have
found is that when
you feel like your
heart is going to break,
when your heart is
under assault, really,
when you're feeling deeply
hurt or deeply grieved
about something, it becomes
a physical sensation.
And that's where that word
heartache comes from, right?
Most people have felt this
at one time or another.
You feel like there's an
elephant sitting on your chest
or like you're choking or
like you can't breathe.
Well, when that's going on,
your subconscious mind itself
is under attack, I believe.
And so the subconscious will
put up a wall around that heart
to protect that heart,
that core of your being,
from being broken.
And that wall is
made from layers
of your emotional baggage--
your trapped
emotions, literally.
And so when you have this
kind of wall going on,
it makes it much more
difficult for you
to connect with other people.
It makes it more
difficult for you to feel.
Because this is the brain
that feels, you see.
This brain feels nothing.
And that's why, here we
are in the 21st century,
and we're still
thinking that using war
to settle differences
between nations
is perfectly acceptable, right?
And you'd think we would
have progressed beyond that.
But it's because people in
power, along with most people,
are using this brain,
which feels nothing, right?
This brain is where we feel.
And so a secret to transforming
this planet, I believe,
is to get rid of
enough of these walls.
When those walls are taken down,
it's not unusual for people
to fall in love who never,
ever thought they would,
even at advanced ages.
It's not unusual
for creative ideas
to start to flow spontaneously.
And I'll tell you,
the best ideas
you'll ever have will
be the ideas that
come from this brain,
not this brain, see?
So when people tell you you
should follow your heart,
they're right.
You should.
But what if you
have a heart wall?
Because 93% of people have
this wall that they've put up.
And so it blocks them.
So getting rid of that
wall is so important.
And that's, really,
the most important part
of the Emotion Code.
And the instructions
are all in there,
in the book, how to do this.
But I'll share one story
with you about this.
There was a woman who
came in to see me.
She had neck pain.
And she'd been to a
couple of other doctors
that hadn't been
able to help her.
So she came in to see me and,
as I was talking with her,
she told me that she was single.
And she had been
single for eight years.
She hadn't dated in eight
years, and she was never
going to date again.
She was going to die single,
and she was dead serious.
And I said, gee, why
do you feel this way?
She told me that eight
years before, she
was really deeply in
love with this guy who
dumped her and broke her heart.
And that was it--
no more dating.
Well, she was only 38 years old.
She was an attractive woman.
She was a nurse.
And so I started checking her.
And I found she had put up
this wall around her heart.
And there were three
layers of this wall,
and each one of those
layers was an emotion
that had gotten
stuck in her body
from the breakup
eight years before.
So I cleared those
three emotions.
And suddenly, when
I got done, not only
was the heart wall gone--
this invisible energy wall
around her heart was gone--
but also, her neck pain was
suddenly, just completely,
gone.
And so she left the office
feeling totally fine.
I didn't see her again
for three months.
And when she came back in--
I'll always remember this--
I looked at her,
and I said, hey,
I haven't seen you for a while.
How are you?
She said, oh, she said, my neck
has been fine since I was here.
But, she said, you released
that heart wall for me,
and that really works.
Because, she said, about
two weeks after I was here,
I found out my
childhood sweetheart has
been living right around
the corner from me
for almost eight years,
and we're dating,
and we're in love,
and I think he's
going to ask me to marry him.
And I just thought,
wow, what a shift.
[LAUGHING]
>> Unbelievable.
So how can people
develop an awareness
that they might have something
that's holding them back?
>> Well, first of all, I would
say that if you haven't had any
of your emotional
baggage removed,
then you definitely have
things holding you back.
Because this
phenomenon of trapped
emotions is really universal.
If you're having any
kind of discomfort,
that's a sign of
emotional baggage.
If you're having physical
discomfort in some way--
there's something that doesn't
feel right in your body--
99 times out of 100, there
will be some emotional baggage
there.
If you're feeling some kind of
emotional or mental discomfort
in some way, if your life
isn't working like it should,
if you keep picking the wrong
kind of person as a mate over
and over and you
can't figure out why,
if you tend to feel certain
emotions that you don't really
understand-- you're not sure
where they're coming from--
if some things
easily trigger you,
and you can become upset
at the drop of a hat,
or you find yourself
crying for no reason,
or if you are not able to
keep enough money in your bank
account, or if you just
can't seem to find love,
and you're alone, those are
all signs of emotional baggage.
I've come to the conclusion
that our emotional baggage
is the single biggest
common denominator for us
as human beings, for all the
trouble that we suffer from,
all the suffering that we have.
And, in fact, one of the
interesting things about this
is you can say the same
thing about animals.
Because animals also
develop trapped emotions.
And it's the biggest
single underlying cause
of their behavioral and
physical difficulties, as well.
>> Especially our closest
domesticated friends like dogs.
I mean, you pick up a pound
dog and you can't pat it,
it's had some form
of abuse, right?
>> Absolutely.
>> So this is probably a little
bit more philosophical, then.
If our emotions are causing
us so much discomfort,
causing us to be
sort of walled off
from achieving our
highest potential,
is their purpose
to make us suffer?
Like, I believe in
the spiritual ideology
that everything is
unfolding perfectly,
that there is some sort
of perfection seeking
to emerge through any
situation, whether it's
a pain or a disease that's
causing us to adjust, to shift.
What is your belief around
why these emotions are causing
so much suffering in our
life, and what are they there
to show us?
>> Well, they're there,
really, to teach us.
When you feel an emotion,
when something happens to you
and you feel an
emotion coming up,
that's really a message
from your deep subconscious.
Now, that message
that's coming up
is happening not only because
of what's going on in the moment
but it's also coming up
because of past experience.
And it may not even be
your past experience.
It may be the past experience
of an ancestor five or six or 10
generations ago or more because
of what they went through.
And so when we experience
this kind of discomfort
in our lives, it's a
great teacher for us
because it enables us, you
see, to eventually realize
that the body is talking to us.
Our bodies talk to us.
And the language of the body
is these kinds of things.
The language of the body
is discomfort in some way.
But it may not
necessarily be physical.
It could be mental,
emotional, et cetera,
like we've talked about.
Any time you're having any
kind of a symptom in your life,
there's usually an emotional
cause that's underlying that,
and that's how the
body speaks to you.
And if the emotion
is big enough,
and if you ignore
it long enough,
it can become a
life-threatening problem for you
that you may be diagnosed with.
And your doctors
won't have any idea
why you're manifesting
this life-threatening
disease, and neither
will you, consciously.
But if you can just tap into
the subconscious mind, you see,
it has a perfect
understanding of why you're
manifesting whatever it is.
And you can ask questions,
and you can get answers,
and most of the time,
things can improve.
And you learn that lesson,
and then you move on.
But I totally agree with you
that it's, really, all perfect,
and we're all moving towards
higher levels, hopefully.
And we're growing,
and we're progressing.
And that's, I think,
what life is about.
It's about learning.
It's about learning how to be
happy and have joy in spite
of what's going on around us.
And I think a key to
that-- just as an aside--
I think that a key
to that is learning
to have gratitude no
matter what happens,
even if things are going wrong.
If you can learn to
have gratitude and look
for the good in
that thing, you'll
probably find that there are
some hidden blessings in there
that you hadn't thought of.
And gratitude and joy are
very, very similar vibrations.
They're very close
to each other.
And I think that the purpose of
our life, one of the purposes,
is to learn how to
live in a state of joy.
And I think the key,
really, is gratitude.
>> Beautiful.
You're skilled at being
able to help identify
what these walls might be.
And when you talk about
identifying emotions,
I feel like you're
talking about hypnosis
or being able to speak
to the subconscious
or being able to do this.
Can people tap into identifying
their own trapped emotions,
or do they need a facilitator?
And what's the process of really
identifying, and then also
releasing, these emotions?
I know that you do
different practices.
But how can, if someone's on
their own and they're like,
well, I think I've got
an emotional issue,
how can they discover
that, and then how can they
clear that emotion?
>> Well, the Emotional
Code process is, actually,
really simple.
And what I can do
with your viewers
is I can walk them
through something
that we call the sway test.
There are a number of different
methods of getting answers
from the subconscious mind.
They all have to do with how
balanced and how strong or weak
the muscles in the body are.
So, for example, one of
the methods that we use
is called the ring-in-ring test.
And you just make
a ring in a ring.
And as you ask
questions, your body
will tend to stay
stronger for yes,
and the rings will
tend to stay together,
or the rings might tend to
break if the answer is no.
Because what we have found is
that the subconscious mind has
an effect on the physical body.
The subconscious mind has an
effect on the physical body
such that if the
subconscious mind is
manifesting a no
answer, your body
will be a little bit weaker.
And so you can
pick up that change
through various methods
of muscle testing.
But there's another method
that we call the sway test
that I can share.
So here's how this works.
It works best if
you're standing.
So if you just stand
up and close your eyes,
drop your hands
down to your sides,
and just try to relax
there for a moment.
If you think about
something that
is true or positive
or congruent,
the body will tend to sway
forward after a few seconds.
If you're thinking about
something that is not true,
something that's false or
negative or incongruent,
your body will tend
to sway backwards.
And this is seen
in plants, as well,
where, for example, if
you a plant in a pot
and you put it near
a window, it will
grow towards the light coming
in from the window, which
it needs.
But if you put a
plant in a room that
has uniform lighting
all around, and you
put a speaker in the
room that's playing
beautiful, soothing,
classical music and lullabies,
the plant will grow towards
the speaker playing the music.
On the other hand,
if that speaker
is blaring harsh, grating sounds
and annoying kinds of music,
the plant will grow
away from the speaker.
And that's like the sway test.
So as you're standing there
with your eyes closed,
arms down by your
sides, totally relaxed,
we'll start with
something negative.
Think about the word "war."
We hear that word every day.
It's in the papers all the time.
All of our lives,
we've heard this word.
But imagine for a
moment that you're
trying to explain to someone
on a human level what
really goes on in war.
What's happening?
What are young men doing
to other young men?
What's happening to young men
and young women and families
and children?
What's going on in wars?
Think about that for a moment.
What is really happening?
If you were involved in a
war, what would that be like?
What are things that you'd be
expected to do to other people?
What would that be like?
As you're thinking about that,
the moment your subconscious
mind makes a connection with
what your conscious mind is
thinking, at that
moment, your body
will start to sway
backward, trying
to move you away from
the sheer negativity
of that thought of war.
Now, let's shift gears and
go to something positive.
Imagine now that, as you're
standing there, eyes closed,
hands down by your
sides, totally relaxed,
imagine that a thousand
years have gone by.
We're a thousand
years in the future.
You're still alive, but
you're a different person
than you used to be
because you're capable now
of giving and receiving
pure, unconditional love.
Imagine now that you're
bathed in this field
of unconditional love.
But not only that,
you've changed
because you're capable and
full of unconditional love
for all creation,
for every creature,
for the whole universe.
And imagine that the love
that fills your heart
is so big that your heart
can't even contain that love,
and that love
expands out from you
and fills the
immensity of space.
Imagine what it
would be like to be
a being capable of that
kind of love, on that order.
Now, as you're
thinking about that
and what that would be
like, when your subconscious
mind connects with what your
conscious mind is thinking,
your body will start
to sway forward
because it wants to move
towards that kind of state,
you see, that state of being.
And a lot of your
watchers, I know,
are right on their
tiptoes with that.
Because that's a real thing.
And I believe it's something
that we're capable of, you see,
as time goes on.
Because we're eternal beings.
We have no beginning.
I believe we'll have no end.
This is just a phase
we're passing through
to learn some things.
So that's the sway test.
Now, you can also
use the sway test,
and you can ask questions.
Like, for example, as
you're standing there,
totally relaxed, arms down
by your sides, eyes closed,
you could ask yourself
a question like,
do I have a trapped emotion?
And as you think
about that thought--
do I have a trapped emotion,
do I have a trapped emotion--
if you do, your body will
start to sway forward for yes.
And if you don't, your body will
start to sway backward for no.
But if you don't, it's probably
because you have a heart wall,
and that's really
blocking things.
So you can also ask,
do I have a heart wall?
And your body will
go forward or back.
Getting rid of that
heart wall, I believe,
is about the most
important thing
that you can do for yourself.
It's not unusual at
all for people's lives
to change in dramatic ways
when that wall is taken down.
>> Do we put up heart
walls to protect ourselves?
I mean, every emotional
response in our lives
is a response to save
ourselves, in a way.
And so we must hold
on to them with vigor.
We don't want to let go
of them because we're
scared that, if we
do, we might suffer.
>> The heart wall, we believe,
is always put up in response
to the heart being under
attack, or under assault.
And so it's there as
a protective mechanism
in the same way that, if
the bombs are falling,
you might want to move down into
the bunker for a while until
the bombs stop falling.
But the problem is, when
the bombs stop falling,
when the divorce is over
or the bully moves away
or you quit that job
and get a better one,
the problem is that your heart
is still inside this bunker.
And so to get the heart
out of the bunker,
the only way that we know
of is to actually identify
those emotional layers one
at a time and release those.
And so, to continue with what
we were talking about before,
the process is we have
a chart of emotions.
There are 60 emotions
on this chart.
It's divided into two
columns and six rows.
And so once you're
able, in some way,
to get yes or no answers
from the subconscious mind
with the sway test or some other
method, then you simply ask,
do I have a heart wall?
And if the subconscious
mind says yes, then you ask,
can I release an emotion
from the heart wall now?
And we ask this question because
sometimes some people need
to keep the wall for a while.
But in my own
experience, I've never
seen the subconscious mind
want to keep that wall
for more than about a week.
Because sometimes the
subconscious mind will say,
no, I need this wall.
But then, as the
mind weighs things,
it finally realizes,
you know, I really
do need to get rid
of this because it's
interfering with my ability to
really experience life fully.
And so, then you can
identify in the same way,
getting yes and no answers,
you identify the emotion.
Is this emotion in
column A or column B?
One of those will be strong.
And then, is it in one of
the odd rows or an even row?
And one of those will be strong.
And that'll take you to a
cell with five emotions.
And then, you just ask,
well, is it pride or shame
or shock or unworthy
or worthless?
And one of those will be
strong, unless the emotion is
inherited, and then
those will probably all
be weak, which is
the signal that you
need to go to the
inherited realm
and that that's
where it came from.
>> And is it
inherited via lineage,
or is it inherited via
social incarnation or all
of the above?
Because we can understand
with some consistency
that if there's been a lot
of trauma or pain or struggle
in the early parts of your
life and your father's
life or your mother's life
and your father's father,
then that can make sense.
But do you also consider
these other esoteric forms
of imprinting?
>> Well, what we find in our
testing is that we do inherit
emotional energies
from a parent.
And those, according
to the testing,
those come at conception.
So when we're conceived, those
are passed from Mom or Dad.
And sometimes these can go
back for many generations.
And science is now
bearing this out, right.
For example, they're finding
that the grandchildren
of Holocaust survivors have
radically different markers
for aging and are much
more susceptible to stress.
Their DNA changes, and
the hormones for aging
are markedly elevated in the
grandchildren of Holocaust
survivors.
Now, medicine is trying to
understand how this happens,
but in the Emotion Code,
we know how it happens.
Because the emotional
energy is passed down,
and it can be released.
And that energy, also, we
find, releases not only
from the living human being
that it's released from--
or animal, they inherit
sometimes, as well--
but also, those energies
release from the parent
and the grandparent and
the great grandparent,
all the way back.
And we've seen this happen.
In fact, I'll share
a story with you,
and then I'll try to answer
some of the other questions.
I was at an event
once, and there
was a woman who came
up out of the audience.
I asked for a volunteer
who was in pain,
and this woman came up.
She limped up from the
audience up onto the stage.
She had a hip problem.
And it was a nine on
a zero to 10 scale.
It had been going
on for about a year.
She'd seen a couple of
other doctors for it,
but she hadn't been
able to get any help.
And it was so bad, she'd
have to literally lift
her leg with her hands to
get in and out of her car.
It was really bad.
So I found an imbalance
and released it,
and it took her pain
from a nine to a four.
And then, the next
thing that I found
was that she had had an
inherited trapped emotion.
And the inherited
trapped emotion,
she'd gotten from her father.
The emotion was
fear, as I recall.
He'd gotten it from
his father, and he'd
gotten it from his father.
Now, the subconscious mind--
this woman's subconscious
mind-- knew where
this had come from.
And so I'm just asking
questions and getting answers
from her subconscious--
yes, no, yes, no.
And it went back 12 generations.
Now, one of the things
that's funny about this
is that we have found
that, in these cases,
those ancestors will
actually appear.
Every time I've
ever tested this,
they always seem to show up.
They don't appear so that
people can see them--
I've never seen one--
but they show up so that if I
ask the person on the muscle
test, are all of these
ancestors here in this room,
the answer is always yes.
And I'll ask, well, are
they out in the audience?
No.
Are they floating in the air?
Are they standing on
the stage with us?
Yes, every single time.
I've done this all
over the world, right.
And so, they were there, and
there wasn't anything else
we needed to know.
But think about this.
Why would they show up?
Because, you see,
in quantum physics,
one energy can be shared in
an infinite number of places.
It can appear in the
same place simultaneously
to an infinite number.
And so, when a
trapped emotion is
shared, that emotional
energy is not duplicated,
it's just shared in this strange
quantum physics kind of way.
So all those ancestors
had this energy.
They were there because it was
about to be removed from them.
And some of them had been
dead for a long time, right?
So anyway, I released
that trapped emotion.
And the pain instantly
went to a zero.
And she's dancing
around on the stage--
I mean, literally,
dancing around.
It was gone.
And she went back and
sat down in the audience.
And I finished my lecture.
And when I went back to
our booth when I was done,
about a minute after that, a
woman came up to the booth,
and here's what she said to me.
She said, Dr. Nelson, she said,
I want you to know something.
She said, I am one
of those people
who have that gift to be
able to see these spirits
that other people don't see.
And she said, it's kind
of been a blessing,
and it's kind of been a curse.
But she said, I wanted
you to know something.
She said, when you were talking
about those ancestors of hers--
all those grandfathers all
the way back-- she said,
I wanted you to know that I saw
them all, just like you said.
They were all there,
just like you described.
But she said, there
was something else
going on that I'm not
sure you were aware of.
She said, what I
saw was, surrounding
the stage were at
least 200 spirits,
and I knew who they were.
They were this woman's
unborn descendants,
and they were there
rejoicing that they were not
going to have to
take on this woman's
crippling emotional baggage.
[LAUGHING]
>> Whoa.
Wow.
It takes a small journey into
this esoteric pool of knowledge
to start to understand that when
we delve into the subconscious
through hypnosis, there's this
recollection of soul journeys
and soul planes and
incarnations which
is impossible to ignore now.
And so, I can definitely
see that there's
some incredible work to
be done on this plane.
>> Oh, it's really interesting.
And one of the most
profound experiences
that I had in my
life with healing,
it was two years after "The
Emotion Code" book came out,
and I asked my daughter,
Natalie, to work on me.
And she was in Seattle,
and I was near Las Vegas.
But this work is
done at a distance.
So she's working on me.
We're not on the
phone or anything.
She finds I have this
inherited trapped emotion
of hopelessness.
And when she finds
that, she starts
to feel emotional
herself about this.
And she finds out,
through testing,
that I got this from my father.
He got it from his mother.
She got it from her mother.
It goes back 22 generations
to, probably, the 1400s.
And all of a sudden,
my daughter can
feel the presence of this
woman, this grandmother,
that this began with.
She can feel her standing
right next to her,
not in a spooky or a creepy kind
of way but just, she was there.
And my daughter could feel
this woman's emotions,
this grandmother.
She could feel how
desperate she was
to have this emotional energy
released from her posterity.
And she could also feel how
overwhelmed with gratitude
this woman was that
this was being done.
Now, when that was
released, my daughter
could feel it ripple through
all those generations.
And I had this
experience where, all
of a sudden, this background
music of hopelessness that
had been playing in my life,
every waking moment of my life,
was suddenly gone.
And I never even knew that
it was there until the moment
that it was gone.
And then the silence
was deafening.
And I realized, my gosh,
I've had that all my life,
and it was an antique.
It was ancient.
It was from that grandmother
all those generations ago.
So you think about, you see,
we're a product not only
of our own emotional
baggage from our own life
that we've lived since we were
born or since we were conceived
but also we have this inherited
energy that we often receive.
We all have it.
And you think about, I
mean, some of our ancestors
went through the pogroms or they
went through all kinds of wars
or who knows.
I mean, you go back
500 or 600 years,
life was difficult, at
best, for everybody.
So we have that baggage.
And we also sometimes
come into this world
and are conceived
with other baggage.
And I'll tell you
what we are finding--
this is really interesting,
but the subconscious mind knows
these answers, of course--
and what we're
finding is it appears
that every single person who's
walking around on this Earth
has been here before as a
person without a physical body,
but as an angel on assignment
to guide and help someone else--
probably one of their
connections, a family member--
through this life.
And so sometimes, when
you're in that state
and you're living,
really, as a guardian
angel to a person who's
going through mortality,
you might experience emotional
intensity that you may now then
take with you.
And maybe hundreds
of years later,
you're actually born yourself.
And then you wonder why
certain things cause
you to feel certain emotions.
It's really interesting.
>> Wowsers.
Let's move a little bit
more to present day.
We're here.
What other practices
can people do--
as we come to wrapping up
here-- what other practices can
people do on a regular basis to
be attentive to their emotions,
to soothe their emotions?
I don't know-- is it
hot bath, meditation.
What practices are
there, separate,
that you recommend to people?
>> Well, meditation, of
course, is wonderful.
And I'm always reminded of Wayne
Dyer, who was, at one point,
told by a guru, you
need to meditate, Wayne.
And he said, yeah, yeah,
tell me something else.
But meditation is important.
It's also important to realize
that we choose our emotions,
that our emotions that come
up for us our messengers
from the subconscious but that
we also have the opportunity
to experience
whatever is coming up
but then change that
into a different emotion,
a positive emotion.
And there's a whole a whole
palette of positive emotions
that we can choose from, right?
So that's important.
I think that forgiveness
is critically important,
and we often forget
about forgiveness.
But I think that you can't
really have peace in your life
if there's someone that
you have not forgiven.
Because it creates an
energy blockage, you see.
And so energy can't
flow if you're
stopping that forgiveness.
Now, it may be that
you need to forgive
you-- yourself-- for something.
I mean, we all do stupid things.
But forgiveness is possible.
And one of the things we've
found is that sometimes people
who cannot forgive someone who's
really wronged them find that
when they remove the emotional
baggage around the event
or around the person, they
are able to move to that point
where they can
forgive and move on.
And I think it's also
important to realize
that life is a process.
And there was a great
guru who escapes me now
who once said that, in my world,
nothing ever goes wrong, right?
And I think that
it's a great attitude
to have that
everything is perfect,
and everything is unfolding
for you as it's supposed to,
but what are you supposed to
learn from these things that
are going on?
I used to tell my
patients who, many of them
had been told there was no
hope, that their disease was
forever--
many of them, if they believed
that, it would be hard
for them to get well--
but I would tell them,
look, just because
you've been diagnosed
with this particular
thing, if you
have learned what you
need to learn from this
and if the higher
power is willing,
there's no reason why
you can't get better.
>> Amazing.
One last thing you brought up
very briefly in our discussion
before we had this interview
was the power of language.
And I've interviewed
a lot of people
on the power of language.
And there was one
particular story
that we came across recently
about a gentleman who
was in a car accident,
and he nearly died.
There was his crushed femur, and
it narrowly missed the artery,
and he would have bled to
death in 55 seconds-- smashed
his face.
It was really a
horrific accident.
And he studied, then,
Buddhism and psychology
and trying to make peace and
amends with the situation.
But his story was, I nearly
died in a car accident.
And it wasn't until
25, 30 years later,
when he was doing a workshop,
and someone said, well,
you can't nearly be pregnant.
You can't nearly have died.
You didn't die.
So everything you added after
there was a car accident
was your story, and you
became a victim of that story.
How do people become aware
of how much of a victim
they may have become
because of their language?
And how can they use their
language to sort of free
themselves, I guess,
emotionally from things that
could be holding them back?
>> Well, I think that
it takes practice.
We are so used to saying
things and expressing things
in our language that are,
really, often patently
ridiculous.
For example, a common saying
is, he made me so mad,
or she made me so upset, or
that just made me so angry.
It's really silly
because nothing
has any control over you.
You have the ultimate
choice, right?
And you can choose
your emotions.
Nobody can make
you feel anything
that you don't choose to feel.
in other words.
And I'm always brought
back to Victor Frankl
and the experience that
he had in the Holocaust
as a psychologist
observing people.
And he said that, in
the camps, they all
remembered that person who would
walk through the hut giving
away their last piece of bread.
And there weren't very many
of those kinds of people,
but they remember those people.
And he said that what
he learned from that
is that everything
else can be taken away
from us but one thing,
and that is our ability
to choose our response
in any given situation.
So I think meditation
is important.
Thinking about the things that
we say-- being aware, I think,
is really the beginning of it.
And language is
incredibly powerful.
And the things that we say
can limit us in dramatic ways,
or they can help us to
progress in dramatic ways.
It depends on how
we use the language.
>> Where do you
see the history--
sorry, the history, we've
spoken about the history--
where do you see the
future of medicine?
Where do you see the future--
I have people around
me say, and Laurentine,
who wishes she could be here--
my wife-- says she imagines
a medicineless society
in the future.
How do you see the future
of healing, of abundance,
of health?
And what is your
vision, I guess,
with your work and mission?
>> Well, I believe that
the world is in this
transformational process.
To me, the Earth
is in labor, trying
to bring forth a whole
new kind of existence
where we are living
from our hearts
and where each person is able
to manifest into the world
all of their gifts and
all of that perfection,
that blueprint, that
is within their heart.
And I know that's
where we're going.
I know that's where
we're going to get.
We are going to get there.
It's going to be a little bit of
a struggle because, of course,
there are entities, and
there are governments,
and there are
corporations and so
on that have control issues
that want to maintain
their control at all costs.
But I think that
Western medicine,
with all of its advances, for
where we are as a civilization
right now, is phenomenally
good at taking
care of acute
problems, not so good
at taking care of other
kinds of problems.
But I think that,
as time is going on,
the awareness, it's inevitable
that the more organized
Western side of health
care is going to blend,
and the two are going to,
eventually, blend together.
And I believe that
in the future,
we will have a world where
people will receive the best
options, that they
will really be getting
what they really, truly need.
And there are
places like that now
in the world where you
can go and, whatever
it is that you need,
you'll have a team
of people that will
look at you, and you
can get what your body
is really desiring.
And I think that's the future.
So the future is so
bright, I think we probably
should wear sunglasses, really,
most of the time, even indoors.
[CHUCKLING]
>> Any final
messages for people,
in terms of the journey
that they're going through?
Maybe they've heard about
this for the first time,
or they're sort of slowly
waking up to the message
that they might have
something to clear or work on,
or that there's innate
potential within them?
What would you say
to these people?
>> Well, I think the first thing
is to realize that the body
that you're in is
really a temple.
So take care of it.
Treat it that way.
And look at other
people that way, too.
It can change how you feel.
The other thing
you need to realize
is that you have
emotional baggage.
Sorry, but you do.
And so you need to start
getting rid of that baggage.
However you want to
do it, that's fine.
The Emotion Code is a very
simple, easy, rapid, efficient
method.
And it's important
to realize, also,
that odds are very high
that you have put up
a wall around your heart.
And so you're
living, very likely,
with a heart that
is in a bunker.
It makes it much more
difficult for you
to find love and stay in love
and give and receive love.
It'll make it easier for you to
feel negative emotions, harder
to feel positive emotions.
You need to get
rid of that wall.
And by doing that, you're
going to be not only
changing your own
life but changing
the lives of those around you.
And you're also going to help
the Earth in its labor process
to give birth to this new world
that we're trying to get to.
>> Beautiful analogy-- amazing.
You're an enlightened being.
You have a special
message for the world.
And I think it's incredible
that you answered that calling
and took that step to
be a guide for people
and to support them in
their emotional liberation.
Thank you so much for your time.
>> You're so welcome.
[THEME MUSIC]